''' Man page for grabchars 2.0
''' Uses Larry Wall's "patch" man page as a structural template.
.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Bell System Logo is used as a dummy character.
'''
.ie n \{\
.tr \(bs-\*(Tr
.ds -- \(bs-
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(bs\h'-12u'\(bs\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(bs\h'-12u'\(bs\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
'br\}
.TH GRABCHARS 1 "2026" "grabchars 2.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
grabchars \- get keystrokes directly from user
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grabchars
[options]
.PP
.B grabchars select
[options]
.I list
.PP
.B grabchars select\-lr
[options]
.I list
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBGrabchars\fP gets characters from the user as they are
typed in, without having to wait for the return key to
be pressed.  Among other things, this allows shell scripts
to be written with highly interactive menus.
.PP
By default,
.I grabchars
will obtain one character from stdin, echo that character to stdout,
and return with a status of one; meaning one character read.
.PP
In addition to the basic character-reading mode,
.I grabchars
provides a positional mask mode
.RB ( \-m ),
a filter-as-you-type vertical selection menu
.RB ( select ),
and a horizontal selection menu
.RB ( select\-lr ).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-b
Both
.I stdout
and
.I stderr
are used for output.  This is useful for setting a variable in
a shell script and echoing a keystroke to the screen at the
same time.
.TP 5
.B \-c<valid characters>
Only characters in
.I <valid characters>
are accepted.  Regular expressions such as [a\-z]
may be used to specify ranges.  All other characters are ignored.
.TP 5
.B \-C<excluded characters>
The inverse of \fB\-c\fP.  Rejects characters that match the pattern;
accepts everything else.  Uses the same character class syntax as
.BR \-c .
Both flags may be combined: a character must match
.B \-c
AND not match
.BR \-C .
.TP 5
.B \-d<char(s)>
Default char or string to output if the user hits
.B RETURN
or lets
.B grabchars
timeout.  The status that is returned is the same as if the user had
typed in the character or string, so this option may be used with
the
.B \-s
(silent) flag.
.TP 5
.B \-e
Output goes to
.I stderr
rather than
.I stdout.
.TP 5
.B \-E
.TP 5
.B \-E1
Enable line editing.  Arrow keys, Home, End, Backspace, Delete,
Ctrl\-K, Ctrl\-U, and Ctrl\-W are active.
When
.B \-n
is greater than 1, editing is on by default.
See
.B LINE EDITING
below.
.TP 5
.B \-E0
Disable line editing.  Backspace and arrow keys are treated as raw
bytes, not editing commands.  Useful when you want to capture every
keystroke exactly as typed.
.TP 5
.B \-f
Flush any previous input.  By default,
.I grabchars
will see any characters present in
.I stdin,
which allows for some typeahead in shell scripts.
.TP 5
.B \-h
Help/usage screen.
.TP 5
.B \-H<r|b|a>
Highlight style for
.B select\-lr
mode.
.B \-Hr
uses reverse video (default);
.B \-Hb
uses bracket style (\fI[option]\fP);
.B \-Ha
uses arrow style (\fI>option<\fP).
Bracket and arrow styles are useful on terminals where reverse video
is unavailable or hard to see.
.TP 5
.B \-L
Map characters to lower case.
.TP 5
.B \-m<mask>
Positional input validation.  Each character position is validated
against a corresponding element in the mask pattern.  Characters that
do not match the mask at the current position are silently rejected.
Literal characters in the mask (parens, dashes, slashes, etc.) are
auto\-inserted into the display as the user types.
The mask length determines the character count (like an implicit
.BR \-n ).
See
.B MASK SYNTAX
below.
.TP 5
.B \-n<number>
Number of characters to read.  By default,
.I grabchars
looks for one character.
.TP 5
.B \-p<prompt>
Sets up a prompt for the user, printed to
.IR stdout .
See
.BR EXAMPLES .
.TP 5
.B \-q<prompt>
Sets up a prompt for the user, printed to
.I stderr
rather than
.IR stdout .
This is almost always the right choice in scripts, because stdout
can then be captured with
.IR $() .
.TP 5
.B \-r
The
.B RETURN
key exits.  Use this with the
.B \-n
option to allow for variable numbers of characters to be typed in.
In mask mode with quantifiers, Enter also accepts partial input when
all required mask elements have their minimum counts satisfied.
.TP 5
.B \-R
Raw byte mode.  Every byte read from the terminal is collected as-is,
without escape-sequence parsing.  This means arrow keys and other
multi-byte sequences count as multiple bytes toward
.BR \-n .
The flags
.BR \-c ,
.BR \-C ,
.BR \-U ,
.BR \-L ,
and
.B \-E
are silently ignored in raw mode.
See
.B RAW MODE
below.
.TP 5
.B \-s
Silent.  Do not output anything. Just return a status.
.TP 5
.B \-t<seconds>
Time to allow the user to respond.  By default, the user
can take as long as he or she wants to.  The timeout option allows
you to write shell scripts where you can offer some assistance
if it's obvious that the user might be stuck.  If a default
.RB ( \-d )
is set and the user has typed nothing, the default is returned on
timeout; otherwise the exit code is 254.
.TP 5
.B \-U
Map characters to upper case.  Note that if \fB\-U\fP and \fB\-L\fP
are both specified on the command line, the last one that occurs
will win out.
.TP 5
.B \-Z0
Suppress the trailing newline that
.I grabchars
normally prints to
.I stderr
after input is complete.
.TP 5
.B \-Z1
Re\-enable the trailing newline (the default).
.TP 5
.B \-\-version
Print the version string and exit with code 0.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS "grabchars select \fIlist\fP [options]"
Choose from a comma\-separated list with filter\-as\-you\-type narrowing.
The selected option text is written to stdout.  The exit code is the
0\-based position of the chosen option in the original list.
.PP
.I list
is a comma\-separated string of options, e.g. \fI"red,green,blue"\fP.
To load options from a file, use
.B \-\-file
.IR filename .
.PP
Controls:
.RS
.TP 8
type
Narrow the list (filter\-as\-you\-type)
.TP 8
Backspace
Widen the filter
.TP 8
Up / Down
Cycle through matching options
.TP 8
Tab
Fill filter with full name of current match
.TP 8
Enter
Confirm selection; output to stdout
.TP 8
Escape
Cancel; no output; exit code 255
.RE
.PP
Options \fB\-d\fP, \fB\-t\fP, \fB\-q\fP, \fB\-e\fP, \fB\-b\fP, \fB\-f\fP, and \fB\-Z0\fP/\fB\-Z1\fP
all apply in select mode.
.SS "grabchars select\-lr \fIlist\fP [options]"
Horizontal selection.  All matching options are shown on one line, with
the current selection highlighted.  Type to filter, Left/Right (or
Up/Down) to move, Enter to confirm, Escape to cancel.
.PP
Accepts the same options as
.BR select ,
plus
.B \-H<r|b|a>
for highlight style.
.SH LINE EDITING
When
.B \-n
is greater than 1, line editing is active by default
(equivalent to
.BR \-E1 ).
Disable with
.BR \-E0 .
Force on for a single character with
.BR \-E .
.PP
.nf
Key             Action
\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-  \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
Left / Ctrl\-B   Move cursor left one character
Right / Ctrl\-F  Move cursor right one character
Home / Ctrl\-A   Move to beginning of line
End / Ctrl\-E    Move to end of line
Backspace       Delete character before cursor
Delete / Ctrl\-D Delete character under cursor
Ctrl\-K          Kill (delete) from cursor to end of line
Ctrl\-U          Kill from beginning of line to cursor
Ctrl\-W          Kill word backward
.fi
.SH MASK SYNTAX
A mask is specified with
.B \-m\fI"pattern"\fP
and constrains input position by position.  Literal characters in
the pattern (parentheses, slashes, dashes, etc.) are auto\-inserted
into the display as the user types.
.PP
.B Mask character classes:
.PP
.nf
Code  Accepts                 Character set
\-\-\-\-  \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-   \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
U     Uppercase letter        [A\-Z]
l     Lowercase letter        [a\-z]
c     Alphabetic character    [A\-Za\-z]
n     Digit                   [0\-9]
x     Hexadecimal digit       [0\-9A\-Fa\-f]
p     Punctuation             [!\-/:\-@[\-`{\-~]
W     Whitespace              space or tab
.     Any character
[...] Custom character class  same syntax as \-c
.fi
.PP
Any character not listed above is treated as a literal and will be
auto\-inserted.  To use a mask code character as a literal, escape
it with a backslash (e.g., \fB\\\\n\fP for a literal \fIn\fP).
.PP
.B Quantifiers
(follow the preceding mask element):
.PP
.nf
*   Zero or more (greedy; requires Enter to complete)
+   One or more (greedy; requires Enter to complete)
?   Zero or one (optional)
.fi
.PP
Quantifiers cannot be applied to literal characters.
.SH RAW MODE
With
.BR \-R ,
.I grabchars
bypasses its escape\-sequence parser.  Every byte received from the
terminal is collected as\-is; multi\-byte sequences such as arrow keys
(ESC [ A = three bytes for Up) count as three bytes toward
.BR \-n .
.PP
Raw mode is useful for key\-binding capture, debugging what byte
sequences a terminal sends, or any situation where you need the
exact bytes that keys produce.
.PP
Output is binary; pipe to
.BR xxd (1)
or
.BR od (1)
to inspect:
.PP
.RS
.B grabchars \-R \-n 3 | xxd
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 5
.B grabchars
gets one keystroke
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-caeiou
get one of the vowels
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-c i
get the letter 'i'
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-C aeiou
get any character except a vowel
.TP 5
.B grabchars '\-penter a letter '
print the prompt "enter a letter "
.TP 5
.B grabchars '\-qenter a letter '
print the prompt ('q' for question) "enter a letter " through
.IR stderr .
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-n4
get four characters.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-d a
If the first character typed is a
.BR RETURN ,
expand it to 'a'.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-d gumby
If the first character typed is a
.BR RETURN ,
expand it to "gumby".
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-r
The
.B RETURN
key will exit
.IR grabchars .
You would use this with the
.B \-n
option, so that variable numbers of characters may be entered.
.TP
.B grabchars \-n 4 \-r \-t 10
Accept up to four characters, or exit when
.B RETURN
is hit, or exit when 10 seconds have elapsed.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-t2
timeout after two seconds.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-d gumby \-t2
If the first character typed is a
.BR RETURN ,
or if two seconds have gone by,
pretend that the user typed in "gumby".
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-n3 \-p 'initials: '
print a prompt and grab three characters.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-c 0123456789 \-n2 \-t10
get two numbers with a ten second timeout.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-m "(nnn) nnn\-nnnn" \-q "Phone: "
read a full phone number with auto\-inserted punctuation.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-m "nn/nn/nnnn" \-q "Date (MM/DD/YYYY): "
read a date; slashes are inserted automatically.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-m "#xxxxxx" \-q "Hex color: "
the leading \fI#\fP is auto\-inserted; read six hex digits.
.TP 5
.B grabchars select "yes,no,cancel" \-q "Action: "
present a filter\-as\-you\-type vertical menu.
.TP 5
.B grabchars select\-lr "small,medium,large" \-q "Size: "
present a horizontal selection menu.
.TP 5
.B grabchars \-R \-n 3 \-q "Press an arrow key: " | xxd
capture raw bytes; an arrow key produces three bytes (e.g. 1b 5b 41).
.PP
Note that arguments like "\-n4" or "\-n 4" are handled the same way.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I Grabchars
returns the number of characters (or bytes, in raw mode) successfully
read — typically 1 for a single keystroke.
.PP
Special exit codes:
.PP
.nf
254   Timeout with no input and no default set
255   Escape pressed, bad arguments, or other error
0     \-\-version flag
.fi
.PP
In
.B select
and
.B select\-lr
modes, the exit code is the 0\-based index of the chosen option in
the original list (0 = first option, 1 = second, etc.).  Escape
returns 255; timeout without a default returns 254.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sh (1),
.BR bash (1),
.BR read (1),
.BR xxd (1),
.BR od (1)
.PP
Full documentation is in the source distribution:
.PP
.nf
README.md       \-\- flag reference
docs/cookbook.md  \-\- 21 runnable examples
docs/maskInput.md \-\- mask syntax reference
docs/RAW\-MODE.md  \-\- raw byte mode reference
.fi
.SH AUTHOR
Dan Smith
.PP
Originally written by me, in C, in 1988 and posted to
.IR comp.sources.misc .
Rewritten in Rust in 2025\(en2026 as grabchars 2.0.
.PP
Source: https://github.com/DanielSmith/grabchars
